---
author: Zohar Cochavi
bibliography: bibliography.bib
geometry: margin=1.5in
---

# MSc Thesis Application - SRILAB

Dear Prof. Martin Vechev,

I am a graduate student at Delft University of Technology currently looking for
a Master's thesis subject to finish my studies. Your research group, _SRILAB_,
caught my attention in my search for a subject because of the variety of problems
it tackles. In short, I would like to apply for a Master's thesis at _SRILAB_,
focusing on the field of _Safe and Interpretable Artificial Intelligence_. I
especially like technical challenges that require answering tough moral
questions such as fairness. (Fair Normalizing Flows by BalunoviÄ‡ et al. (2022)
comes to mind).

Over the past years, I have held a variety of positions, ranging from student
researcher to construction worker, and from sports trainer to software
developer. These experiences are invaluable to me when considering the impact of
my work, and creatively approaching the problem at hand. As AI Safety touches on
many different areas normally not directly associated with computer science, I
think the field can benefit greatly from varied experience and a
multidisciplinary approach.

Moreover, several of my prior experiences are also technical. I have experience
as a software developer in a production environment, where documentation and
communication are clear necessities. Having more research-oriented work as well,
I have found independence and persistence to be especially valuable as the exact
result of such work is not always easy to determine beforehand. Not only were
these projects incredibly interesting to do, but working through the full design
cycle of several large projects has made me develop my organizational skills as
well.

One experience that stands out to me as a particularly enriching journey was my
bachelor thesis which, unexpectedly, resulted in a philosophical argument. It
proposed an alternative to computational approaches to fairness in the context
of negotiating autonomous agents (Fairness by Discussion, Cochavi, 2022).
Working on this made me value transparent and accessible communication, which I
hope to bring to light when doing research. Not only because it is incredibly
interesting, but because it addresses the issue of opaqueness currently plaguing
machine learning and AI systems.

All this to say that I have a strong interest in science communication, and,
while I hope to work on it in the future, my first next step should be to gain
more quality technical experience. Therefore, my hope is to join your lab,
fine-tune my technical abilities, and, above all, learn more about current
challenges in the field of AI Safety.

Kind regards,

Zohar Cochavi
